1."Turning point" (Endothermic part of the roast)

These affect the turning point:
	1.Starting charge temp.
	2."Density of coffee and air" affect the initial charge temperature and turning point. Those can be measured by:
		-Density check on the coffee,
		-Barometric pressure within the environment.(that matters for big roasters 70kg+ and is corrected by airflow)
If after the turning point coffee heats up too quickly you need to lower "the gas". If it's too slow, you need more power.

Summary:
34:30 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mnWNIIpJVQQ


2."Drying/Yellowing" (water goes down to about 1%-1,5%) (another endothermic part of the roast) 
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U0AYlyYUG_Y)

Whole process from beginning to the end of Yellowing(usually 4-6min) is preparing coffee to move through the browning stage at the speed that we desire.
Important: Amount of the time that it takes from green to yellow does not affect the coffe flavour. 
There is a THEORY though, that going slowly can couse some hydrolysis and create some additional sugars from cellulose molecules. 

However it has a direct impact on the next stages or the roast. 

	Too fast: 
	singeing, scorching

Machine notes:
	-metal around the drum is going to allow for some amount of ambient temperature to hit the probe.
	-generally temperature readings are going to be different for different roasters but reliable fot the single one.


As you dry coffee its moisture usually drops from 9,5%-14%(10,5%-11,5% is really nice) moisture to about 0,5%-1,5%. Further in the roast it drops closer to 0,5%.
By breaking down molecules(carbohydrates etc.) during the roast new moisture replaces the escaping one so it doesn't drop to 0%.

Mill City Roasters claim that moisture alone is not determining how you should roast. Instead density is the key.

Dense things absorb heat more quickly, less dense more slowly. For dense coffee you want it to "slow down" a bit.

For dense coffee less speed when coming out from the turning point.
Less dense coffee won't absorb heat as quickly so it needs a little energy boost = "more gas".
Guy likes to see 14 to 18 degrees of increase of temperature every 30 seconds. [Farenheit]

Moisture evaporates from the coffee as it absorbs energy.


Smelling the aroma, looking at the colour, checking temperature, looking at the timer, "trying coffee"
It's important to balance out getting info from electronic measure and sensory checking the coffee.

	Smells of coffee:
	-green: grassy, green peppers
	-early yellow: hay{PL:siano}, straw{PL:s³oma}, oats
	-further Yellow: bread, pancake, waffles, biscuits, wheat

	That's mainly because of chlorophyll. Aroma of grass gets stronger and then it turns into dry grass aroma.



3. Browning(Pre-First Crack)/First Crack - Exothermic part of the roast, Development begins
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fMHLClnf40s)

As browning starts first chemical reactions in the bean start taking place. Generally changing chemical compounds in the coffee into flavours.

Hydrolysis doesn't take place during roasting, only in the living plant.

Maillard's reactions and carmelisation(and other reactions aswell) start taking place right after yellowing (this phase is called browning). They can't take place if there's water in the coffee.
There is a THEORY that stalling the rosat before first crack can cause some hydrolysis to happen and produce some additional sugars.

Going through these reactions:
-too fast - you burn the compounds out
-too slow - you might not break molecules down to small enough ones that result in flavour.
Finding the optimal speed requires tasting(cupping) and just trying again.

Categories of different aromatic compounds that are being created after browning starts, but BEFORE FIRST CRACK:
-ketones, 
-furans(furfuryl), 
-aldehydes, 
-esters, 
-phenalics, 
-terpenoids, 
-thiols.
These are created from big molecules (ATP, Cellulose, etc.).

Look of the profile curve doesn't tell anything about exact taste of coffee. It has to be tasted.

Extending maillard reaction or carmelisation will not produce more and more sweetness.
At some point sugar molecules will start breaking and there will be less sugars in the end.

Simple carmelisation - dehydration of sugars through the heating effect so as you have your simple sugar and it breaks, gives off:
C02, H2O and furfuryl(smells sweet, tastes bitter).

First crack occurs due to pressure built up by water(steam) and many new compounds trying to escape the seed.
At this point we pick up the airflow to get more convection(more effective way of heating coffee).


Cupping info: Tasting within a group is the better way to learn.



4.Post-First Crack(sometimes called "Development")
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b3FcbOlH8MY)

Pyrolysis, carbonization and dry distillation happen at very high temperatures and to complex molecules, so their impact on coffee roast is pretty small.
A term for all of them would be charring(PL:zwêglenie).

Charring- getting flavors of burning (like when you make a steak) - bitter, but add more complexity.
Also a way to get rid of deffective compounds of coffee by turning them into charring flavors.

After first crack:
-going fast - you can charr the outside of the bean while keeping the flavours you developed in the coffee on the inside. (harder to hit the exact same roast time)
-going slowly - you can break down unique characteristics of the coffee and get more unilateral flavour. (easier to hit the same roast time)

After first crack the gases that build up in the coffee can gass off very quickly.
Further into post-first crack - bigger difference in coffee in small amounts of time (reactions speed up).

Second crack- as you approach it the coffee structure starts to decompose and lots of C02 is building up in the bean.
If little pucks start popping off (called chipping) we're moving too quickly (too violently). Especially too much convective heat will do that.- DEFECT by SCAA

Oil- as you open the seed more and its pores become more open(through degradation of cellulose+swelling of the seed) fat molecules break free from the inside of the bean.
This oil will go bad very quickly(go rancid). Also dark roast is open to oxygenation very quickly and leaches its CO2 very quickly.
Dark roast coffee will go stale really fast.
It's better to go fast so you can avoid the oil.

THEORY: Natural processed coffee may already have some molecules broken down from sitting in the cherry and being affected by its juices.
As a result when you roast it you're actually further in the roast than you think.

When you start getting deeper into the roast you also start affecting brittleness(PL:kruchoœæ). 
Barista will have to adjust the grinder setting to fix that issue. So if you're not consistent with brittleness baristas will have to adjust their grinding alot.

General way of roasting for espresso: a little more slow through the first crack and after the first crack.
It's done to tame down the acidity and bring to light the sweetness a bit more.
"Making an espresso in like taking magnifying glass and shining acidity through it".




